Title: Real Talk: Hollow Knight
Date: 2018-03-04 19:00 
Category: Game Analysis
Tags: Hollow Knight
Slug: HollowKnight
Authors: Uni 
Summary: Some quick critical thoughts on one of last year's biggest indie successes, Hollow Knight. This isn't a full critique, I just needed to put some thoughts out there.

Hollow Knight was a weird experience. On one hand, it validated the Metroidvania genre to me, games which I had previously saw as requiring too much compromise in their mix of mechanics to feel satisfying in any singular way. On the other hand, Hollow Knight doesn't come close to fixing the problems endemic to the genre, but it's not because of mechanical compromise. Instead, Hollow Knight's flaws stem from a total refusal to compromise its atmosphere, even at the cost of alienating its audience.

The player character starts with only the most basic tools for platforming and combat: a jump, a slash, and a heal. This seems like a pretty standard setup, until considering the secondary mechanics which are usually there by default aren't included. The map system represents the most glaring set of ommissions, with the game being so committed to putting you in your character's shoes that it eventually crosses the line into player hostility. If you want a map, you have to go find the cartographer and buy one in each individual area. If you want to see where you are on that map, you have to equip a charm in one of your three starting slots, which can only be swapped at save points. To update your map, you need to buy a quill, and your character only has the time to write down new information when resting at a save point. To have these save points or other useful locations marked on the map, you'll need to buy that capability for each individual type. The limited map availability is the best of these mechanics, making new areas feel foreign and reminiscent of walking into a dark, unfamiliar room while grasping for a light switch. Requiring a charm to see where you are on that map initially seems petty, but you can use it even from the start without losing out on the capabilities of other badges, and it explains how seeing your location on a paper map would work at all. Contextualized inconveniences like this can flesh out the world, but when they're added at the expense of internal consistensy, the game has overshot the goal, and the landmark updating system crosses this line. If your character has a pen and ink, can see where they are, and can open the map at any time, why can't you choose to update the map as you go? Why must you purchase the ability to mark save points, instead of doing it yourself? A good balance may have been just that, letting players use their quill to mark down points of interest and barriers manually. The map currently doesn't show when you've encountered impassible obstacles at all, so allowing players to their own mapping would not only correct the break in internal consistensy, but also smooth out the exploration and more closely adhere to the game's atmospheric goals.

This thread of taking things a little too far extends to navigating the world as a whole. Hollow Knight's fast travel points can be frustratingly sparse due to a desire to keep them logical in the greater context of the setting. A mushroom infested cavern wouldn't have a tram station, so you always have to backtrack. Deep nests, mines, hidden hives, and anywhere else that wouldn't be logical tram stop won't have one, so you better get used to backtracking. The amount of backtracking can get pretty excessive, especially with the aforementioned lack of marked barriers on your map, meaning you'll waste a lot of time re-checking those areas if you aren't perfectly attentive. This is further exacerbated with the location of upgrades, which aren't usually placed in a way that fits a linear order of progression, but instead in locations that follow from the world's internal logic. Even if you're pretty sure where to go next, you might not be able to make any progress, because the upgrade is hidden in an entirely different area without much signaling at all. Vendors work the same way, with NPCs like the blacksmith scattered across the world, because it wouldn't be logical for everyone that's useful to you to coincidentally live next to each other. The flexibility in progression this style allows is can be a quality of its own, but when I was prevented from getting a boss' reward due to the lack of an upgrade that I hadn't required until that point was a clear demonstration of its downside. Just because the world has an amazing level of depth and polish, that doesn't mean organizational changes to smooth out the experience would have made the world less compelling. The current layout leads to backtracking and directionless wandering to a degree that detracts from the atmosphere, instead making players numb to the experience or more inclined to just go look something up. When lonely exploration turns into repetitive searching, the game's strength has turned into a critical weakness.

With the world construction being at the heart of these problems, I have to wonder what the game would be like with a reduced scope. Hollow Knight's biggest issues might have been mitigated with fewer areas to explore, reducing backtracking and letting each one have more development in general. However, this approach would also take away Hollow Knight's unique appeal, with a world that just keeps growing and letting you constantly break through the floor of what you thought was the bottom. Secret areas aren't just bonuses, they're vital to the experience, with some of the best and most meaningful content is hidden away in them. By not forcing players to experience everything, putting in the effort and discovering something most people won't see is a uniquely special feeling. This payoff requires trudging through a slow start, some player-hostile mechanics, excessive backtracking, and wandering, but it can be very worthwhile investment. 

If I had to summarize Hollow Knight's successes and failures, it would be that it approaches greatness from the right instead of the left. It is excessively concerned with world building and polish, when a simpler approach would have lead to a much smoother experience. Considering how few games deliver on their setting as strongly as Hollow Knight does, it's well worth experiencing, especially at its $15 price tag. Even if this isn't typically the kind of game you enjoy, there's a lot you can respect about its artistic integrity.
